---
title: "Data Warehousing"
teaching: 45
exercises: 15
questions:
- "What is a datawarehouse?"
- "How can I leverage relational databases for reporting and BI?"
- "How can I use python to populate a datawarehouse for Tableau?"
objectives:
- "Model real world situations with a schema"
- "Identify facts and dimensions within a datawarehouse."
keypoints:
- "Data warehouses are designed to facilitate reporting."
- "Business intelligence tools are built to use data warehouse."
- "A data warehouse is built by an ETL process, and a data integration process."
---

We saw in the previous lesson that a database can be used to store structured, tabular data.  The collection of tables, their structures and constraints is sometimes referred to as a database schema.  

## What is a Data Warehouse?

- Central repository of information coming from one or more sources: transactional systems and other relational databases contained structured, semi-structered or unstructured data.
- Data is processed, transformed and ingested at a constant pace
- Users: data scientists, business decision makers, business analysts
- Tools: BI tools, SQL Clients, Spreasheets

## Design Overview: Facts and Dimensions

A datawarehouse is made up of two types of tables.  Facts represent a single
measurement.  A measurement is simply a value without a context.  In datawarehousing, these are referred to as "Facts".

~~~
*Facts* refer to individual measurements without a context.
*Dimensions* refer to pieces of context that give meaning to a *Fact*.
~~~

## ETL : Extract Transform Load

Extract Transform Load refers to the process of taking many sources of data, and loading them to a common database.  A single ETL Process will take a source and load it into one or more targets.

## Data Integration and Aggregation

After loading data, it may be important to derive or aggregate additional results.  This is known as data integration.

## Reporting and BI

Tools such as BI are meant to read data from a datawarehouse and create visualization.

> ## Creating an ETL Process
>
> Break out gapminder dataset into two tables: GDP by year, and a country/continent table.
{: .challenge}